Answer Explanations




© 2016 The College Board. College Board, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board.   K-5MSA04
Answer Explanations




Section 1: Reading Test
QUESTION 1
Choice D is the best answer. The passage begins with the main character, Lymie, sitting in a restaurant
and reading a history book. The first paragraph describes the book in front of him (“Blank pages front
and back were filled in with maps, drawings, dates, comic cartoons, and organs of the body,” lines 11-
13). The second paragraph reveals what Lymie is reading about (the Peace of Paris and the Congress of
Vienna) and suggests his intense concentration on the book (“sometimes he swallowed whole the food
that he had no idea he was eating,” lines 23-24). In the third paragraph, the focus of the passage shifts
to a description and discussion of others in the restaurant, namely “A party of four, two men and two
women . . . ” (lines 42-43).

Choice A is incorrect because the passage does not provide observations made by other characters, only
offering Lymie’s and the narrator’s observations. Choice B is incorrect because the beginning of the
passage focuses on Lymie as he reads by himself and the end of the passage focuses on the arrival of
Lymie’s father, with whom Lymie’s relationship seems somewhat strained. Choice C is incorrect because
the setting is described in the beginning of the first paragraph but is never the main focus of the
passage.

QUESTION 2
Choice C is the best answer. The main purpose of the first paragraph is to establish the passage’s setting
by describing a place and an object. The place is the Alcazar Restaurant, which is described as being
“long and narrow” and decorated with “art moderne,” murals, and plants (lines 2-6), and the object is
the history book Lymie is reading.

Choice A is incorrect because rather than establishing what Lymie does every night, the first paragraph
describes what Lymie is doing on one night. Choice B is incorrect because nothing in the first paragraph
indicates when the passage takes place, as the details provided (such as the restaurant and the book)
are not specific to one era. Choice D is incorrect because nothing in the first paragraph clearly
foreshadows a later event.

QUESTION 3
Choice C is the best answer. The passage states that “when Lymie put down his fork and began to count
. . . the waitress, whose name was Irma, thought he was through eating and tried to take his plate away”
(lines 34-38). It is reasonable to assume that Irma thinks Lymie is finished eating because he is no longer
holding his fork.

Choice A is incorrect because Lymie has already been reading his book while eating for some time
before Irma thinks he is finished eating. Choice B is incorrect because the passage doesn’t state that
Lymie’s plate is empty, and the fact that Lymie stops Irma from taking his plate suggests that it is not
empty. Choice D is incorrect because the passage gives no indication that Lymie asks Irma to clear the
table.

QUESTION 4
Choice A is the best answer. The passage makes it clear that Lymie finds the party of four who enter the
restaurant to be loud and bothersome, as their entrance means he is no longer able to concentrate on
his book: “They laughed more than there seemed any occasion for . . . and their laughter was too loud.
But it was the women’s voices . . . which caused Lymie to skim over two whole pages without knowing
what was on them” (lines 52-59).

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because lines 55-59 make clear that Lymie is annoyed by the party of
four, not that he finds their presence refreshing (choice B), thinks they resemble the people he is
reading about (choice C), or thinks they represent glamour and youth (choice D).

QUESTION 5
Choice C is the best answer. The previous question asks about Lymie’s impression of the party of four
who enter the restaurant, with the correct answer being that he finds them noisy and distracting. This is
supported in lines 55-59: “But it was the women’s voices, the terrible not quite sober pitch of the
women’s voices, which caused Lymie to skim over two whole pages without knowing what was on
them.”

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about Lymie’s impression of the party of four who enter the restaurant. Rather than showing
that Lymie finds the group of strangers noisy and distracting, the lines simply describe how two of the
four people look (choices A and B) and indicate what Lymie does when his father joins him in the
restaurant (choice D).

QUESTION 6
Choice A is the best answer. In the passage, Lymie closes his book only after “a coat that he recognized
as his father’s was hung on the hook next to his chair” (lines 67-68). It is Lymie’s father’s arrival that
causes him to close the book.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because lines 67-70 of the passage clearly establish that Lymie closes
his book because his father has arrived, not that he does so because the party of four is too loud (choice
B), because he has finished reading a section of the book (choice C), or because he is getting ready to
leave (choice D).

QUESTION 7
Choice D is the best answer. In lines 74-79, the narrator describes Mr. Peters as “gray” and balding,
noting that he has “lost weight” and his color is “poor.” This description suggests Mr. Peters is aging and
losing strength and vigor.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the description of Mr. Peters in lines 74-79 suggests he is a
person who is wan and losing vitality, not someone who is healthy and in good shape (choice A), angry
and intimidating (choice B), or emotionally anxious (choice C).

QUESTION 8
Choice B is the best answer. In the last paragraph of the passage, Mr. Peters is described as being
unaware “that there had been any change” in his appearance since he was younger (lines 80-81). Later
in the paragraph, the passage states that “the young man” Mr. Peters once was “had never for one
second deserted” him (lines 90-91). The main idea of the last paragraph is that Mr. Peters still thinks of
himself as young, or at least acts as if he is a younger version of himself.

Choice A is incorrect because Mr. Peters is spending time with Lymie, his son, and there is no indication
that he generally does not spend time with his family. Choice C is incorrect because although there are
brief mentions of a diamond ring and manicured fingers, the paragraph focuses on Mr. Peters’s overall
appearance, not on his awareness of status symbols. Choice D is incorrect because the last paragraph
clearly states that Mr. Peters is “not aware that there had been any change” and thinks of himself as
young.

QUESTION 9
Choice B is the best answer. In lines 81-85, Mr. Peters is described as having “straightened his tie self-
consciously” and gestured with a menu “so that the two women at the next table would notice the
diamond ring on the fourth finger of his right hand.” Mr. Peters’s actions are those of someone who
wants to attract attention and be noticed.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the idea Mr. Peters wants to
attract attention to himself. Choices A and C address Mr. Peters’s view of himself. Choice D indicates
that Mr. Peters’s view of himself affects his behavior but does not reveal that he acts in a way meant to
draw attention.

QUESTION 10
Choice B is the best answer. The last sentence of the passage states that Mr. Peters’s
mischaracterization of himself makes him act in ways that are not “becoming” for a man of his age. In
this context, “becoming” suggests behavior that is appropriate or fitting.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of describing one’s behavior, “becoming”
means appropriate or fitting, not becoming known (choice A), becoming more advanced (choice C), or
simply occurring (choice D).

QUESTION 11
Choice B is the best answer. In Passage 1, Beecher makes the point that even if women in her society
are perceived as being inferior to men, they are still able to effect considerable influence on that society:
“But while woman holds a subordinate relation in society to the other sex, it is not because it was
designed that her duties or her influence should be any the less important, or all-pervading” (lines 6-10).

Choice A is incorrect because Beecher describes the dynamic between men and women in terms of the
way they can change society, not in terms of security and physical safety. Choice C is incorrect because
even though Beecher implies that women have fewer rights in society than men do, she doesn’t say that
women have fewer responsibilities. Choice D is incorrect because Beecher does not assert that women
are superior to men.

QUESTION 12
Choice A is the best answer. The previous question asks what point Beecher makes regarding the
relationship between men and women in her society, with the answer being that women are considered
inferior but can still have influence. This is supported in lines 6-10: “But while woman holds a
subordinate relation in society to the other sex, it is not because it was designed that her duties or her
influence should be any the less important, or all-pervading.”

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about the point Beecher makes regarding the relationship between men and women in her
society. Instead, they describe ways men can affect society (choices B and C) and explain how certain
actions undertaken by a woman can be viewed negatively (choice D).

QUESTION 13
Choice B is the best answer. In the third paragraph (lines 22-37), Beecher suggests that women can be
“so much respected, esteemed and loved” by those around them that men will accede to their wishes:
“then, the fathers, the husbands, and the sons, will find an influence thrown around them, to which they
will yield not only willingly but proudly . . . .” These lines show that Beecher believes women can
influence society by influencing the men around them; in other words, women have an indirect
influence on public life.
Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because lines 34-37 make it clear that Beecher believes women do
have an effect on society, even if it is an indirect effect. Beecher does not indicate that women’s effect
on public life is ignored because most men are not interested (choice A), unnecessary because men do
not need help governing society (choice C), or merely symbolic because women tend to be idealistic
(choice D).

QUESTION 14
Choice D is the best answer. Regarding the dynamic of men and women in society, Beecher says that
one sex is given “the subordinate station” while the other is given the “superior” station (lines 1-2). In
the context of how one gender exists in comparison to the other, the word “station” suggests a standing
or rank.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because in the context of the relative standing of men and women in
Beecher’s society, the word “station” suggests a standing or rank, not a physical location or area
(choices A, B, and C).

QUESTION 15
Choice C is the best answer. When describing how men and women can influence society, Beecher says
the ways they can do so “should be altogether different and peculiar” (lines 11-12). In the context of the
“altogether different” ways men and women can influence society, the word “peculiar” implies being
unique or distinctive.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in the context of the “altogether different” ways men and
women can influence society, the word “peculiar” suggests something unique or distinctive, not
something unusual and odd (choice A), unexpected (choice B), or rare (choice D).

QUESTION 16
Choice A is the best answer. In Passage 2, Grimké makes the main point that people have rights because
they are human, not because of their gender or race. This is clear in lines 58-60, when Grimké states that
“human beings have rights, because they are moral beings: the rights of all men grow out of their moral
nature” and lines 65-68, when Grimké writes, “Now if rights are founded in the nature of our moral
being, then the mere circumstance of sex does not give to man higher rights and responsibilities, than to
woman.”

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because Grimké primarily emphasizes that all men and women
inherently have the same rights (“rights are founded in the nature of our moral being,” lines 65-66). Her
central claim is not that men and women need to work together to change society (choice B), that moral
rights are the distinguishing characteristic separating humans from animals (choice C), or that there
should be equal opportunities for men and women to advance and succeed.

QUESTION 17
Choice B is the best answer. In Passage 2, Grimké makes the point that human rights are not fleeting or
changeable but things that remain, regardless of the circumstances, because they are tied to humans’
moral nature. She emphasizes that human rights exist even if societal laws attempt to contradict or
override them, citing slavery as an example: “These rights may be wrested from the slave, but they
cannot be alienated: his title to himself is as perfect now, as is that of Lyman Beecher: it is stamped on
his moral being, and is, like it, imperishable” (lines 61-65).

Choices A and D are incorrect because in Passage 2, Grimké makes the point that human rights are
inherent and unchanging, not that they are viewed differently in different societies (choice A) or that
they have changed and developed over time (choice D). Choice C is incorrect because Grimké doesn’t
describe a clash between human rights and moral responsibilities; instead, she says that humans have
rights “because they are moral beings” (lines 58-59).

QUESTION 18
Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what point Grimké makes about human rights
in Passage 2, with the answer being that they exist and have moral authority whether or not they are
established by societal law. This is supported in lines 61-65: “These rights may be wrested from the
slave, but they cannot be alienated: his title to himself is as perfect now, as is that of Lyman Beecher: it
is stamped on his moral being, and is, like it, imperishable.”

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about the point Grimké makes about human rights in Passage 2. Instead, they explain the
source of all people’s human rights (choice A), indicate what would happen if rights were determined by
gender (choice C), and discuss why gender is irrelevant to rights (choice D).

QUESTION 19
Choice B is the best answer. In Passage 1, Beecher asserts that men and women naturally have different
positions in society: “Heaven has appointed to one sex the superior, and to the other the subordinate
station” (lines 1-2). She goes on to argue that a woman should act within her subordinate role to
influence men but should not “exert coercive influences” that would put her “out of her appropriate
sphere” (lines 44-46). In Passage 2, Grimké takes issue with the idea that men and women have different
rights and roles. She asserts that as moral beings all people have the same inherent rights and states
that “the mere circumstance of sex does not give to man higher rights and responsibilities, than to
woman” (lines 66-68).

Choice A is incorrect because Passage 2 does not discuss the practical difficulties of something that is
proposed in Passage 1 but rather argues against the main point of Passage 1. Choice C is incorrect
because Passage 2 does not provide historical context for the view expressed in Passage 1; the passages
were published at around the same time and both discuss contemporary society. Choice D is incorrect
because Passage 2 does not elaborate on implications found in Passage 1 as much as it disputes the
ideas explicitly expressed in Passage 1.
QUESTION 20
Choice A is the best answer. While Beecher and Grimké clearly disagree regarding a woman’s role in
society, the passages suggest that both authors share the belief that women do have moral duties and
responsibilities in society. In Passage 1, Beecher writes that “while woman holds a subordinate relation
in society to the other sex, it is not because it was designed that her duties or her influence should be
any the less important, or all-pervading” (lines 6-10). She suggests that women do have an obligation to
use their influence to bring about beneficial changes in society. In Passage 2, Grimké asserts that all
people “are moral beings” (lines 58-59) and that both men and women have “rights and responsibilities”
(line 68). She concludes that “whatever it is morally right for man to do, it is morally right for woman to
do” (lines 81-83).

Choice B is incorrect because neither author suggests that when men work to bring about political
changes, they often do so out of consideration for others rather than considerations for themselves.
Choice C is incorrect because neither passage discusses the value given to women’s ethical obligations,
although both authors suggest that women do have ethical and moral obligations. Choice D is incorrect
because in Passage 1 Beecher argues that women should avoid direct political activism, cautioning
against actions that would put them outside their “appropriate sphere” (line 46).

QUESTION 21
Choice D is the best answer. In lines 65-68 of Passage 2, Grimké writes, “Now if rights are founded in
the nature of our moral being, then the mere circumstance of sex does not give to man higher rights and
responsibilities, than to woman.” In other words, gender does not make men’s rights and duties
superior to women’s. Beecher, on the other hand, begins Passage 1 by stating that “heaven has
appointed to one sex the superior, and to the other the subordinate station,” suggesting that men and
women have fundamentally different natures. Therefore, Beecher most likely would have disagreed
with Grimké’s assertion.

Choices A and B are incorrect because Beecher fundamentally disagrees with Grimké regarding the basic
nature and societal roles of men and women, making it very unlikely that she would have viewed
Grimké’s statement in lines 65-68 with either sympathy or agreement. Choice C is incorrect because
Beecher wouldn’t necessarily have been dismayed by Grimké’s belief as much as she would have simply
disagreed with it, and she does not indicate that the role of women in society is more difficult to play
than is that of men.

QUESTION 22
Choice A is the best answer. In line 14, the passage states that industrial agriculture has become
“incredibly efficient on a simple land to food basis.” In this context, “simple” suggests something basic
or straightforward.
Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of a land to food dynamic, the word “simple”
suggests something basic or straightforward, not something humble (choice B), something without any
decoration or ornamentation (choice C), or something that requires little effort (choice D).

QUESTION 23
Choice B is the best answer. The passage clearly states that conventional agriculture is very efficient,
especially when compared to organic farming: “organic farming yields 25% fewer crops on average than
conventional agriculture” (lines 40-42) and in a study “organic farming delivered a lower yield for every
crop type” (lines 51-52). It can therefore be understood from the passage that conventional agriculture
does a good job maximizing the output of the land that is farmed.

Choice A is incorrect because the passage states how efficient conventional agriculture is in regard to
the amount of food it can produce but does not indicate that it produces a significantly wide variety of
fruits and vegetables. Choice C is incorrect because even if the passage does say that each American
farmer can produce crops to feed “over 155 people worldwide” (lines 16-17), it never claims that
conventional agriculture can satisfactorily feed everyone in the world. Choice D is incorrect because the
passage states that conventional agriculture uses a great deal of nitrogen, not that it changes the need
for nitrogen in plant growth one way or the other.

QUESTION 24
Choice A is the best answer. The passage makes it clear that “most environmentalists” (line 27) believe
conventional agriculture produces food that is not as healthy as food produced through organic farming
and that it is more harmful to the environment than organic farming is: many environmentalists “have
embraced organic food as better for the planet—and healthier and tastier, too—than the stuff produced
by agricultural corporations” (lines 28-31).

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because they are not supported by the passage. The passage never
states that many environmentalists believe that conventional farming reduces the need to convert
wilderness to farmland (choice B), is in any way good for the environment (choice C), or protects wildlife
habitats (choice D).

QUESTION 25
Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks how environmentalists perceive conventional
agriculture, with the answer being that they believe it produces a product that is less healthy and more
environmentally destructive than that produced by organic farming. This is supported in lines 28-31:
“They have embraced organic food as better for the planet—and healthier and tastier, too—than the
stuff produced by agricultural corporations.”

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about how environmentalists perceive the efforts of conventional agriculture. Although the
lines in choice A do touch on environmentalists’ views, they indicate only that most environmentalists
don’t view conventional agriculture’s ability to “produce more food on less land” (line 25) as beneficial
to the environment. Choice C is incorrect because these lines address environmentalists’ view of the
environmental effects of conventional and organic farming but not the taste or nutritional value of the
food produced. Choice D is incorrect because these lines focus on a drawback to organic farming.

QUESTION 26
Choice C is the best answer. The passage makes it clear that while both conventional and organic
farming need nitrogen for plant growth, conventional farming uses synthetic fertilizers and organic does
not: “Conventional agriculture makes use of 171 million metric tons of synthetic fertilizer each year, and
all that nitrogen enables much faster plant growth than the slower release of nitrogen from the compost
or cover crops used in organic farming” (lines 61-65).

Choice A is incorrect because the passage does not state that conventional and organic farming are
equally sustainable and does state that organic farming needs “more land” to produce “fewer crops”
(lines 42-43) but does not indicate that it always requires dramatically more land. Choice B is incorrect
because the passage does not state that organic farming uses artificial chemicals. Choice D is incorrect
because the passage mentions nitrogen runoff only as a product of conventional farming, not organic
farming, and does not indicate that only the nitrogen in conventional fertilizers is dangerous.

QUESTION 27
Choice D is the best answer. The previous question asks about the relationship between conventional
agriculture and organic farming, with the answer being that unlike organic farms, conventional farms
use synthetic fertilizers. This is supported in lines 61-65: “Conventional agriculture makes use of 171
million metric tons of synthetic fertilizer each year, and all that nitrogen enables much faster plant
growth than the slower release of nitrogen from the compost or cover crops used in organic farming.”

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about the relationship between conventional and organic farming, instead describing the
efficiency only of conventional agriculture (choice A), discussing one perceived positive aspect of
conventional agriculture (choice B), and highlighting a drawback of organic farming (choice C).

QUESTION 28
Choice B is the best answer. The passage states that the authors of the study comparing conventional
and organic farming have come to the conclusion that an “ideal global agriculture system” would
“borrow the best from both systems” (lines 80-82). The quote from Jonathan Foley in lines 84-97
indicates that this ideal system would take into consideration many different factors, including the
nutrition and calories offered by specific types of foods as well as different geographic, economic, and
social needs.

Choices A and D are incorrect because the passage makes it clear that the “ideal global agriculture
system” would give consideration to multiple factors, not that it would focus mainly on productivity
(choice A) or nutritional value (choice D). Choice C is incorrect because Foley states that the ideal system
would take economics into consideration but does not indicate that farmers’ economic interests would
be weighed against consumers’ needs.

QUESTION 29
Choice D is the best answer. The passage states that conventional agriculture can be superior to organic
farming in terms of producing “sheer calories” (line 88). In this context, “sheer” most nearly means pure;
the passage is referring to the pure number of calories delivered by foods.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because in the context of discussing the calories foods can provide,
“sheer” suggests the pure number of calories. Also, it does not make sense to say that calories can be
seen through (choice A), are somehow sudden or happen unexpectedly (choice B), or are at a very sharp
angle (choice C).

QUESTION 30
Choice B is the best answer. Figure 1 shows that the organic yield as a percentage of conventional yield
is similar for cereals and all crops, with both yielding roughly 75%.

Choice A is incorrect because figure 1 shows that the organic yield as a percentage of conventional yield
is higher for fruits (just under 100%) than for vegetables (just under 70%). Choice C is incorrect because
figure 1 shows there were only 28 observations for oilseed crops. Choice D is incorrect because figure 1
shows that the organic yield as a percentage of conventional yield is higher for oilseed crops
(approximately 90%) than for vegetables (just under 70%).

QUESTION 31
Choice D is the best answer. Every organically grown species represented in figure 2 produces a smaller
yield than do their conventional counterparts. All of the organically grown species are within a range of
approximately 60–90% of the conventional yield.

Choice A is incorrect because figure 2 shows that soybeans have the highest yield (approximately 90%),
not the lowest. Choice B is incorrect because figure 2 shows that organically grown barley and maize are
produced at a lower yield than the conventionally grown species (just below 70% and just below 90%,
respectively), not a comparable one. Choice C is incorrect because figure 2 shows that soybeans, not
tomatoes, have the highest yield of the organically grown species.

QUESTION 32
Choice B is the best answer. The majority of the passage focuses on the experiment concerning “how
much the crowd influences the individual, and whether it can be controlled from outside” (lines 42-44).
After explaining the experiment and the results it produced, the passage moves on to consider
questions raised by the results, such as whether the findings are site specific or “true in general” (lines
75-76), why different findings are observed, and whether companies can “boost their products by
manipulating online ratings on a massive scale” (lines 85-86).

Choice A is incorrect because the passage does not conclude by explaining the practical ways the
experiment’s findings have been applied but rather by considering questions the findings raise. Choices
C and D are incorrect because the passage does not indicate that there were any flaws in the
experiment’s findings and does not include statements from anyone who disputes the findings.

QUESTION 33
Choice C is the best answer. The author of the passage suggests that a group of people can be “wiser”
and more effective than a single person at assessing a quantitative answer, or a measurement, versus
producing a valid qualitative judgment, or a judgment of the quality of something. This is most clear in
lines 11-14, which state that when guessing a bull’s weight or how many gumballs are in a jar, “your
guess is probably going to be far from the mark, whereas the average of many people’s choices is
remarkably close to the true number.”

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because lines 11-14 indicate that the author believes that crowds may
be more effective than individuals when arriving at quantitative answers rather than qualitative results.
Nothing in the passage suggests that the author believes that crowds are better at starting
disagreements than studying an issue in depth (choice A), supporting ideas rather than challenging them
(choice B), or ranking opinions rather than coming up with new ideas (choice D).

QUESTION 34
Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what the author of the passage suggests about
the wisdom of crowds, with the answer being that crowds can be more effective at producing
quantitative answers than qualitative results. This is supported in lines 11-14: when it comes to guessing
a bull’s weight or how many gumballs are in a jar, “your guess is probably going to be far from the mark,
whereas the average of many people’s choices is remarkably close to the true number.”

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about the author’s belief about when the wisdom of a crowd is effective. Instead, they simply
state that crowds are sometimes wiser than individuals, without explaining when (choice A), put forth a
theory held by someone other than the author (choice C), and explain how hypotheses about the
wisdom of crowds could be tested (choice D).

QUESTION 35
Choice A is the best answer. In the passage, the author explains that those who are skeptical of the
theory that “measuring the aggregate of people’s opinions produces a stable, reliable value” (lines 18-
20) believe that “people’s opinions are easily swayed by those of others” (lines 20-21). This idea is best
supported in lines 55-58, which describe a finding from a study of opinions in crowds: “Comments that
received fake positive votes from the researchers were 32% more likely to receive more positive votes
compared with a control, the team reports.” In other words, people were more likely to give a positive
vote when they thought other people had given positive votes.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not provide support for the skeptics’ idea
that people’s opinions are easily influenced by the thoughts of others. Instead, they cite findings
concerning people giving ratings different from those already given (choices B and C) and share an
observation that the degree to which others can be influenced depends in part on the context of the
situation (choice D).

QUESTION 36
Choice B is the best answer. One question Watts asks in regard to the experiment is whether the results
would hold true on a larger scale. The passage quotes him in lines 74-76: “‘[But] one question is whether
the positive [herding] bias is specific to this site’ or true in general.” Doing the experiment again but
collecting ratings on multiple websites would address Watts’s question, as it would show whether or not
the same results occur on other sites.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect. Providing fewer fake positive comments during the experiment (choice
A), requiring users to be registered on the website (choice C), or telling users that their answers will be
studied (choice D) are actions that likely would affect the results of the experiment involving users
voting on comments about stories on one news website, but they would not address Watts’s questions
about whether the study would produce the same results on other websites or why different categories
of news items had different effects on the news website.

QUESTION 37
Choice C is the best answer. In lines 85-86 the author asks, “Will companies be able to boost their
products by manipulating online ratings on a massive scale?” In the context of selling products by
manipulating user reviews, “boost” most nearly means promote.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because in the context of selling products by manipulating user
reviews, the word “boost” refers to promoting the products, not making them larger or bigger (choice
A), faster (choice B), or safe (choice D).

QUESTION 38
Choice A is the best answer. In lines 85-86 the author asks, “Will companies be able to boost their
products by manipulating online ratings on a massive scale?” In the context of selling products by
manipulating user reviews on a massive scale, the word “scale” most nearly means level or size.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of selling products by manipulating user
reviews, a massive “scale” refers to a great level or size, not to a payment (choice B), an interval or space
between things (choice C), or a plan (choice D).
QUESTION 39
Choice B is the best answer. The figure shows that while the mean score of the control comments in the
politics category is below 2.0, the artificially up-voted mean score for that category is exactly 2.5.

Choice A is incorrect because the artificially up-voted mean score of comments in the business category
is higher than 3.0. Choice C is incorrect because the artificially up-voted mean score of comments in the
fun category is less than 2.5. Choice D is incorrect because the artificially up-voted mean score of the
comments in the general news category is just over 2.0.

QUESTION 40
Choice D is the best answer. The figure shows that the mean score for both control comments and
artificially up-voted comments in the general news category is just above 2.0.

Choice A is incorrect because the mean score for the control comments in the culture and society
category is a little below 2.5 while the mean score for the artificially up-voted comments is over 3.0.
Choice B is incorrect because the mean score for the control comments in the information technology
category is a little above 1.5 while the mean score for the artificially up-voted comments is above 2.0.
Choice C is incorrect because the mean score for the control comments in the fun category is exactly 2.0
while the mean score for the artificially up-voted comments is nearly 2.5.

QUESTION 41
Choice D is the best answer. In the passage Watts notes that “the category of the news items . . . had a
strong effect on how much people could be manipulated” (lines 76-79). That idea is directly supported
by the data in the figure, which show that the difference in mean score between the control comments
and the artificially up-voted comments varies by subject (for example, in the general news category
there is virtually no difference between the mean scores of the two types of comments, while for the
business category there is almost a 1.0-point difference between the mean scores).

Choices A and B are incorrect because the passage provides no data for artificially down-voted
comments or negative social influence. Choice C is incorrect because the figure applies only to one
context (mean score of control comments versus mean score of artificially up-voted comments on the
news site); there is no way to tell what patterns would be observed in other contexts.

QUESTION 42
Choice C is the best answer. According to the passage, Maguire found that taxi drivers’ hippocampi are
“7 percent larger than normal,” which is evidence that “way-finding around London had physically
altered the gross structure of their brains” (lines 10-14). In lines 20-26, the passage indicates that this
finding challenges an earlier consensus: “It had long been thought that the adult brain was incapable of
spawning new neurons—that . . . the brain’s basic anatomical structure was more or less static.
Maguire’s study suggested the old inherited wisdom was simply not true.”
Choice A is incorrect because the passage does not indicate that Maguire used a new method in her
study or that her findings demonstrate the validity of a method. Choice B is incorrect because lines 20-
26 show that Maguire’s findings disprove a popular viewpoint, not that they support one. Choice D is
incorrect because although Maguire’s findings call into question a previous idea, there is no indication
that they challenge the authenticity of any previous data.

QUESTION 43
Choice D is the best answer. The previous question asks about the significance of Maguire’s findings,
with the answer being that her findings call into question a previous belief. This is supported in lines 20-
26: “It had long been thought that the adult brain was incapable of spawning new neurons—that . . . the
brain’s basic anatomical structure was more or less static. Maguire’s study suggested the old inherited
wisdom was simply not true.”

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about the significance of Maguire’s findings. Choices A and B are incorrect because these lines
present Maguire’s observation and her conclusion but do not indicate that her findings call into question
a previous belief. Choice C is incorrect because these lines simply explain one capability of the human
brain.

QUESTION 44
Choice D is the best answer. In line 24, the passage discusses the “brain’s basic anatomical structure.” In
this context, the word “basic” most nearly means fundamental.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because in the context of discussing the brain’s structure, the word
“basic” most nearly means fundamental, not first (choice A), uncomplicated (choice B), or required
(choice C).

QUESTION 45
Choice C is the best answer. The purpose of Maguire’s study of the mental athletes was to try to
determine what it is that makes them so good at memorization, and in particular if they have
structurally different brains than people without such extraordinary memorization skills or if they have
normal brain structures but use them in unusual ways. This is supported in lines 33-37, which state that
Maguire and her team “wanted to find out if the memorizers’ brains were—like the London cabbies’—
structurally different from the rest of ours, or if they were somehow just making better use of memory
abilities that we all possess.”

Choice A is incorrect because the study was an attempt to compare the brains of mental athletes to the
brains of the general population, not to compare the use of different brain structures in memorization
and navigation. Choices B and D are incorrect because the passage makes it clear that it was not known
if mental athletes have unusual brain structures; finding out if they do was actually one of the goals of
the study.

QUESTION 46
Choice B is the best answer. The previous question asks what Maguire’s study of mental athletes
attempted to answer, with the answer being the question of whether it is brain structure or an unusual
use of the brain that gives certain people extraordinary memorization skills. This is supported in lines 33-
37: “They wanted to find out if the memorizers’ brains were—like the London cabbies’—structurally
different from the rest of ours, or if they were somehow just making better use of memory abilities that
we all possess.”

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about what Maguire’s study of mental athletes was investigating. Instead they simply identify
the subject of the study (choice A), explain what the study involved (choice C), and state a finding
concerning the cognitive ability of the mental athletes (choice D).

QUESTION 47
Choice A is the best answer. In lines 38-39, the passage describes part of Maguire’s study by stating that
“the researchers put both the mental athletes and a group of matched control subjects into MRI
scanners.” In the context of a study that has two groups of subjects, the word “matched” suggests
subjects that are similar or comparable.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because in the context of a study with two groups of subjects, the word
“matched” suggests subjects that are similar or comparable, not ones that are exactly the same (choice
B), ones that are recognizably different (choice C), or ones that are rivals (choice D).

QUESTION 48
Choice C is the best answer. The main purpose of the fifth paragraph (lines 57-65) is to relate what
Maguire discovered about the mental athletes, namely that their brain structures are not different from
those of the control group but that the mental athletes use their brains differently: “there was one
telling difference . . . regions of the brain that were less active in the control subjects seemed to be
working in overdrive for the mental athletes.”

Choice A is incorrect because the fifth paragraph does not mention the taxi drivers or the study involving
them. Choice B is incorrect because the fifth paragraph describes some of the unexpected results of
Maguire’s study but does not address the possible reasons for those results. Choice D is incorrect
because the fifth paragraph describes only Maguire’s findings, not her methods.

QUESTION 49
Choice C is the best answer. The passage indicates that Maguire’s second study revealed that people in
the control group don’t have different brain structures than the mental athletes but that they use their
brains differently. In particular, the two groups use different pathways in the brain: “regions of the brain
that were less active in the control subjects seemed to be working in overdrive for the mental athletes”
(lines 63-65).

Choices A and D are incorrect because the passage states that there was only “one telling difference
between the brains of the mental athletes and the control subjects” (lines 57-58); there is no indication
that the control group showed less total brain activity or had smaller hippocampal regions. Choice B is
incorrect because the passage mentions only the general cognitive ability of the mental athletes, noting
that their scores were “within the normal range” (line 54).

QUESTION 50
Choice A is the best answer. After establishing in lines 50-51 that the brains of the control group and
the mental athletes seemed to be “indistinguishable,” the passage suggests that the reason mental
athletes are so good at memorization is that they use parts of their brains that most other people don’t
use when memorizing: “Surprisingly, when the mental athletes were learning new information, they
were engaging several regions of the brain known to be involved in two specific tasks: visual memory
and spatial navigation, including the same right posterior hippocampal region that the London cabbies
had enlarged with all their daily way-finding” (lines 66-72).

Choices B and C are incorrect because the passage explains that the mental athletes were converting
information into images, not abstract symbols or numerical lists. Choice D is incorrect because it is not
supported by the passage, as the author discusses the mental athletes’ actions while memorizing but
not any brain exercises the mental athletes regularly do.

QUESTION 51
Choice A is the best answer. The previous question asks what the passage suggests about the mental
athletes’ success with memorization, with the answer being that they use parts of the brain that most
other people don’t use when memorizing. This is supported in lines 66-72: “Surprisingly, when the
mental athletes were learning new information, they were engaging several regions of the brain known
to be involved in two specific tasks: visual memory and spatial navigation, including the same right
posterior hippocampal region that the London cabbies had enlarged with all their daily way-finding.”

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the lines cited do not support the answer to the previous
question about what the passage suggests about the mental athletes’ success with memorization.
Instead, they acknowledge that Maguire’s findings seem odd (choice B), describe how Maguire first
responded to the results (choice C), and explain things that don’t account for the mental athletes’ ability
(choice D).

QUESTION 52
Choice B is the best answer. According to the passage, Maguire’s study revealed that the mental
athletes were using the same parts of the brain for memorization as were the London cabbies from the
first study, a result that was initially puzzling. The questions in lines 74-78 highlight and expand on that
result, making it clear that it is surprising to find that the mental athletes use images to remember
numbers or use a part of the brain associated with navigation when trying to remember shapes.
Although it became clear how the mental athletes were memorizing things, it was not clear why they
were doing it that way.

Choice A is incorrect because the questions in lines 74-78 seem to reflect additional questions Maguire
and others had based on their result and do not suggest that Maguire’s conclusions may not be reliable.
Choice C is incorrect because the passage makes no mention of any earlier studies of the phenomenon
of using images to remember numbers or to use a part of the brain associated with navigation when
trying to remember shapes. Choice D is incorrect because the questions in lines 74-78 specifically
address Maguire’s two studies but not her earlier work.




Section 2: Writing Test
QUESTION 1



Choice C is the best answer because the sentence is not directly related to the main point of
the paragraph and should not be added. The main idea of the paragraph is that new high-tech
fossil models help expand scientists’ knowledge of ancient species. There is no indication in the
paragraph that these scientists are concerned about the age of the rocks in which fossils are
found.

Choices A and B are incorrect because the sentence should not be added. It neither adds
support to an argument nor provides a transition from one sentence to another. Choice D is
incorrect because the sentence does not undermine any claim made in the paragraph.

QUESTION 2
Choice D is the best answer because “promise” suggests the hope of good things to come. The
models offer the possibility of advancing the field of paleontology in the future.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they do not make sense in the context of the passage.

QUESTION 3
Choice B is the best answer because the sentence should be kept: it provides a brief but useful
explanation of how a 3-D printer works.

Choice A is incorrect. The sentence should be kept because it provides important information
about 3-D printers, not because it explains why X-rays are used in CT scanners. Choices C and D
are incorrect because the sentence is neither contradictory nor confusing and should not be
deleted.

QUESTION 4
Choice C is the best answer because the relative pronoun “which” appropriately follows the
independent clause “The plastic hardens quickly.” It introduces the relative clause explaining
what the fact that the plastic hardens quickly allows the printer to do.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each results in a comma splice (the joining of two
independent clauses with only a comma).

QUESTION 5
Choice A is the best answer because no change is needed. The prepositional phrase “in order”
and the infinitive “to learn” are appropriately used in conjunction to create an idiomatic phrase.

Choices B and D are incorrect because the phrases “in order for learning” and “so to learn” are
not idiomatic. Choice C is incorrect because the pronoun “one” is inconsistent with the noun
“team,” which identifies a specific team.

QUESTION 6
Choice C is the best answer because the personal plural pronoun “their” agrees in number with
its antecedent, the plural noun “fossils.”

Choice A is incorrect because the pronoun “its” is singular and doesn’t agree with the plural
antecedent “fossils.” Choices B and D are incorrect because a personal pronoun is needed in the
sentence. Neither “it’s” (the contraction of “it is”) nor “there” is a personal pronoun.

QUESTION 7
Choice D is the best answer because sentence 2 should be placed after sentence 5 to make the
paragraph most logical. Sentence 2 begins “But now,” signaling a contrast with the past.
Sentences 4 and 5 tell what scientists did in the past, so it makes sense for sentence 2 to follow
sentence 5.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they result in a paragraph that does not proceed
logically. Keeping sentence 2, which begins “But now,” where it is now (choice A) or placing it at
the beginning of the paragraph (choice B) signals a contrast with the past that doesn’t make
sense in context. Placing sentence 2 after sentence 4 (choice C) appropriately signals a contrast
with the past but creates problems for sentence 5, which needs to be placed directly after
sentence 4 to continue the discussion of past research limitations.

QUESTION 8
Choice D is the best answer because the phrase “for example” indicates that an example will
follow. In this paragraph, the sentence that follows the phrase provides a relevant example of
the use of technology to “reproduce fossils that scientists cannot observe firsthand.”

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they set up expectations that are not carried out in
the paragraph. “By contrast” in choice A and “nonetheless” in choice B suggest that contrary
information will follow. “Besides” in choice C suggests that additional information will follow.
None of these choices indicates what should be indicated: that an example will follow.

QUESTION 9
Choice B is the best answer because the simple past tense verb “relied” is consistent with the
other past tense verbs in the National Museum of Brazil example, such as “dug” and
“determined.”

Choices A and D are incorrect because they provide singular verbs that don’t agree in number
with the plural subject “researchers.” Choice C is incorrect because the future tense helping
verb “will” is inconsistent with the other past tense verbs in the National Museum of Brazil
example.

QUESTION 10
Choice C is the best answer because it clearly and concisely combines the sentences in a way
that shows the cause-effect relationship between the condition of the fossil and the decision by
the research team.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because they do not effectively combine the sentences. In
each of these choices, the sentence mischaracterizes the relationship between the condition of
the fossil and the decision by the research team.

QUESTION 11
Choice C is the best answer because the plural pronoun “they” correctly refers to its plural
antecedent “researchers.”

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because “one,” “he or she,” and “it” are singular pronouns. A
plural pronoun is needed to agree in number with the plural antecedent “researchers.”

QUESTION 12
Choice D is the best answer because no transitional phrase is needed between the two
sentences. The first sentence indicates that Tweed wanted to silence Nast, and the second
sentence simply states what happened next: that his attempt to do so failed.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because no transitional phrase or conjunctive adverb such as
“therefore” or “furthermore” is needed between the sentences. The information in the second
sentence neither results from information in the first nor is in addition to it. Rather, it tells what
happened next: the first sentence indicates that Tweed wanted to silence Nast, and the second
states that his attempt to do so failed.

QUESTION 13
Choice D is the best answer because it is the only choice that clearly and concisely conveys the
key information that “in the 1860s and the 1870s, . . . organizations known as ‘political
machines’ started taking control of city governments.”

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they all contain unnecessary words or invert the
logical order of words in ways that lead to vagueness and redundancy. In choice A, it is unclear if
the pronoun “they” refers to “organizations” or “governments.” In choices B and C, word order
is inverted, creating a lack of concision (“political organizations that were powerful” is used
instead of “powerful political organizations”; “governments were taken control of” and
“organizations . . . did so” are used instead of “organizations . . . started taking control of
governments”).

QUESTION 14
Choice A is the best answer because no words are needed between the noun phrase
“purchasing votes” and the explanatory appositive phrase that follows it (“a form of . . .”).

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the participle “being” and the pronouns “that” and
“which” are not needed to introduce the appositive phrase “a form of . . .,” which explains the
concept of “purchasing votes.”

QUESTION 15
Choice B is the best answer because the comma after “1860s” is used correctly with the comma
after “group” to set off the inessential (nonrestrictive) clause “which controlled New York City in
the 1860s.”

Choice A is incorrect because a dash cannot be used in conjunction with a comma to set off a
nonessential clause. Either two commas or two dashes may be used, but not one of each.
Choice C is incorrect because a comma is not needed after “City.” Choice D is incorrect because
a comma is necessary to separate the nonessential clause from the rest of the sentence.

QUESTION 16
Choice C is the best answer because the sentence should be deleted. Although the information
is true, it is not essential to the paragraph, which is focused on political machines in general and
the Tammany Hall group in particular, not on Tweed himself.

Choices A and B are incorrect because the sentence should not be kept. Choice D is incorrect
because, while the sentence should be deleted, it does not undermine or challenge the main
claim of the passage.

QUESTION 17
Choice C is the best answer because no comma is needed before “commented,” and the
comma after “commented” correctly separates the first part of the sentence from the quotation
it introduces.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because each includes one or more unnecessary commas.

QUESTION 18
Choice A is the best answer because the adjective “famous,” which means widely known,
clearly and concisely describes “images.”

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because “well-known” and “commonly known” are repetitive
when used with the adjective “famous,” which means widely known.

QUESTION 19
Choice D is the best answer because it adds the most relevant supporting information. The
paragraph is focused on the cartoons’ depictions of Tweed as a thief, so making an explicit
connection between one cartoon and “Tweed’s greedy nature” is extremely relevant to the
paragraph.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they all contain irrelevant information. Information
about Nast’s other cartoons, Tweed’s prison escape, and Tweed’s hat is not important to add to
the paragraph, which is focused on the cartoons’ depictions of Tweed as a thief.

QUESTION 20
Choice D is the best answer because the word “prosecuted” correctly indicates that Tweed was
charged and tried for his crimes. The preposition “on” is idiomatic when used with the verb
“prosecuted.”

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the word “persecuted” means that someone is
harassed or oppressed, not that he or she is charged with a crime. “Persecuted” doesn’t fit into
the context of this sentence, which is about the legal troubles of Tweed and his gang.

QUESTION 21
Choice A is the best answer because the past tense verb “brought” is consistent with the other
past tense verbs in the sentence, such as “escaped” and “fled.”

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the participle “bringing,” the present tense verb
“brings,” and the present perfect tense verb “has brought” are not consistent with the other
verbs in the sentence.

QUESTION 22
Choice B is the best answer because “triumph” indicates victory. It could be considered a
victory for political cartoons that Tweed was recaptured because he was recognized from a Nast
cartoon.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because “pinnacle,” “culmination,” and “apex” all suggest the
highest point or end of something. None of these words indicates the appropriate relationship
between the recapture of Tweed and the impact of Nast’s cartoons.

QUESTION 23
Choice B is the best answer because the singular possessive pronoun “its” is used correctly to
refer to the singular noun “system.”

Choice A is incorrect because the contraction “it’s” cannot be used to show possession. Choice
C is incorrect because “its” is already possessive; an apostrophe is unnecessary. Choice D is
incorrect because “their” is a plural possessive pronoun that does not agree in number with the
singular noun “system.”
QUESTION 24
Choice B is the best answer because it clearly and concisely combines the sentences to show
the relationship between the claim (“the idea is obviously very attractive”) and the supporting
information about the cameras’ cost.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they mischaracterize the relationship between the
claim (“the idea is obviously very attractive”) and the supporting information about the
cameras’ cost. The claim about the idea’s attractiveness is not in addition to the information
about the cost; rather, the information about the cameras’ cost supports the claim that the idea
is very attractive.

QUESTION 25
Choice A is the best answer because “however” is used correctly to indicate contrast. Some
people consider the art space vital, but that group of people may be too small to generate
necessary funding for the project.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because neither “therefore,” “in effect,” nor “as a rule”
indicates the appropriate relationship between the two sentences being connected. The two
sentences form a contrast: some people consider the art space vital, but that group of people
may be too small to generate necessary funding for the project.

QUESTION 26
Choice B is the best answer because no commas are needed to set off the restrictive clause
(“that is easily understood and appreciated”) that follows the subject.

Choices A and D are incorrect because the clause that describes “work” is essential and should
not be set off with punctuation. Setting off a clause with two commas or dashes indicates that it
is nonessential to the sentence (nonrestrictive). Choice C is incorrect because no comma is
needed between the two verbs.

QUESTION 27
Choice D is the best answer because the sentence should not be added. The general
information it contains is not relevant to this paragraph’s discussion of crowdfunding for the
arts.

Choices A and B are incorrect because the sentence should not be added. Information about
crowdfunding in general is not relevant to the discussion of the arts in this paragraph.
Additionally, the sentence doesn’t support the writer’s point about funding of artistic projects.
Choice C is incorrect because, while the sentence should not be added, “funding received from
public institutions” is not an idea that is developed in the passage.

QUESTION 28
Choice A is the best answer because “in addition” appropriately introduces an additional
problem with crowdfunding in the arts.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because “conversely,” “however,” and “thus” do not indicate
the appropriate relationship between what is said earlier in the paragraph about problems with
crowdfunding in the arts and the additional problem that follows.

QUESTION 29
Choice C is the best answer because the pronoun “who” appropriately introduces a dependent
clause defining “free riders.”

Choice A is incorrect because it results in a comma splice (two independent clauses cannot be
joined by only a comma). Choice B is incorrect because it is not clear which people don’t
contribute: “audiences” or “free riders.” Choice D is incorrect because the infinitive phrase “to
not make” doesn’t make sense in the sentence.

QUESTION 30
Choice B is the best answer because the plural pronoun “they” agrees in number with the
plural noun “people” and results in a clear, straightforward clause: “if people begin to feel that
paying for the art they love is someone else’s responsibility.”

Choice A is incorrect because the passive voice is unnecessary and adds some confusion about
which antecedent the pronoun “them” is referring to: “arts” or “people.” Choices C and D are
incorrect because the pronouns “him” and “her” and “he” and “she” are singular and do not
agree in number with the plural antecedent “people.”

QUESTION 31
Choice C is the best answer because the singular pronoun “her” is consistent with the pronoun
“her” that is used earlier in the sentence to refer to the playwright.

Choices A and B are incorrect because they are plural pronouns that are not consistent with the
singular pronoun “her” used earlier in the sentence to refer to the singular noun “playwright.”
Choice D is incorrect because the singular pronoun “its” is not consistent with “her” and is not
used to refer to a person.
QUESTION 32
Choice D is the best answer because sentence 2, which mentions the high price of the
playwright’s tickets, logically follows sentence 5, which addresses how the price of tickets was
determined.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because sentence 2 does not logically follow sentences 1, 3, or
4. Sentences 3, 4, and 5 present a logical sequence of activities that establish the ticket price:
first the playwright presents the total cost of her production, then she projects the attendance,
and then she sets a per-person cost and prices tickets accordingly. Sentence 2, which addresses
the ticket price, must come after the completion of this sequence; it can’t come before the
sequence (choice A) or interrupt the sequence (choices B and C).

QUESTION 33
Choice A is the best answer because it accurately interprets data in the graph. The category
“dance” had the lowest amount of money raised but also had the highest percentage of projects
fully funded.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because they do not accurately interpret the information
provided in the graph.

QUESTION 34
Choice C is the best answer because sentence 3 needs to be placed before sentence 2 for the
paragraph to be cohesive. Sentence 3 presents a cause (“newspapers . . . have been hit
especially hard by the widespread availability of free news online”) and sentence 2 presents an
effect of that cause (“newspapers have reduced or eliminated investigative resources”).

Choice A is incorrect because sentence 3 needs to precede sentence 2, not follow it: sentence 3
presents a cause (“newspapers . . . have been hit especially hard”), and sentence 2 presents an
effect (“newspapers have reduced or eliminated investigative resources”). Choice B is incorrect
because sentence 1 needs to precede sentence 3, not follow it: sentence 1 offers a general
assessment of “print journalism as a viable profession,” and sentence 3 offers information about
one form of print journalism (newspapers). Choice D is incorrect because sentence 3 is needed
to provide an explanation for the “lower print circulation and diminished advertising revenue”
noted in sentence 2.

QUESTION 35
Choice B is the best answer because the plural noun “reporters” is used correctly as the object
of the preposition “of” and because the colon appropriately joins two independent clauses,
indicating that the second clause (“their work is expensive and time-consuming”) follows
logically from the first (“It is not difficult . . . reporters”).

Choices A and D are incorrect because the singular possessive “reporter’s” does not provide an
object for the preposition “of.” Choice C is incorrect because the comma after “reporters”
creates a comma splice (the comma is used without a conjunction to join two independent
clauses).

QUESTION 36
Choice B is the best answer because the phrase “undertaken in” appropriately identifies why
and for whom investigative journalism is conducted (“in the public interest”—that is, to serve
the interests of all of the people instead of only a few).

Choice A is incorrect because “taking on the public interest” implies that investigative
journalism is the adversary of the public interest (that is, it “takes on,” or confronts, the
interests of ordinary people). Choice C is incorrect because it implies that investigative
journalism overpowers or takes control of the public interest. Choice D is incorrect because it is
unclear what “taking off from the public interest” might mean in this context.

QUESTION 37
Choice D is the best answer because the general term “illegal activities” creates redundancy
with the specific examples provided in the sentence and should be deleted. “Street crime,”
“corporate wrongdoing,” and “political corruption” are all specific examples of “illegal
activities,” so it is unnecessary to mention “illegal activities” as a separate item in the list.

Choice A is incorrect because the general term “illegal activities” creates redundancy with the
specific examples of illegal activities provided in the sentence. Choices B and C are incorrect
because they repeat ideas that are already in the sentence: “corporate wrongdoing” is a type of
“business scandal,” and “political corruption” is a type of “abuse of government power.”

QUESTION 38
Choice C is the best answer because the sentence is out of place in the paragraph: the year
1954 breaks the chronology of the other examples (1974, 2004), and the example is about
television news instead of print journalism.

Choices A and B are incorrect because the sentence is out of place in the paragraph and should
not be added. Choice D is incorrect because, while the passage should not be added, the reason
is not the one specified. The example of journalists reporting a story that exposes a person in
power is consistent with the passage’s definition of investigative journalism.

QUESTION 39
Choice D is the best answer because “deterrent” and “rebuke to” appropriately indicate the
effect that exposure by reporters has had on “malfeasance” (misconduct).

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they do not appropriately indicate the effect that
exposure by reporters has had on “malfeasance” (misconduct). It is unclear how journalism
would act as a “blockade” to misconduct, and it is not idiomatic to say that these reports have
acted as an important “interference to” or “drag on” misconduct.

QUESTION 40
Choice B is the best answer because the verb phrase “need not entail”—an inverted form of
“does not need to entail”—appropriately conveys the writer’s point that the decline in
traditional print media does not necessarily mean “the end of investigative journalism.” In other
words, this possibility is real but can be prevented.

Choices A and C are incorrect because “could not” and “will not” indicate certainty—in other
words, that there is no possibility of an end to investigative journalism. Choice D is incorrect
because “must not” suggests a call to action by the writer (“this must be prevented”) that is
inconsistent with the approach taken in the paragraph.

QUESTION 41
Choice D is the best answer because the noun phrase “innovative adjustments” sets up the
examples that follow. The examples of the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project,
blogs and Twitter, and Help Me Investigate all refer to innovative projects and media that enable
investigative journalism to thrive outside of traditional newspapers and magazines.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they do not set up the specific examples of innovative
projects and media that are helping fill the void left by the decline of investigative journalism in
traditional newspapers and magazines.

QUESTION 42
Choice A is the best answer because no punctuation is needed to separate the subject of the
sentence, “enterprises,” from the adjective phrase beginning “such as.”
Choices B and C are incorrect because placing a colon before or after “such as” would create an
error in sentence structure: a colon must be preceded by an independent clause. Choice D is
incorrect because no comma is necessary here.

QUESTION 43
Choice A is the best answer because the transitional phrase “for example” appropriately
indicates that the Help Me Investigate project discussed in the sentence is an example of the
use of social media mentioned in the previous sentence.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because neither “therefore,” “however,” nor “in any case”
indicates the true relationship between this and the previous sentence. The Help Me Investigate
project discussed in the current sentence is an example of the use of social media mentioned in
the previous sentence.

QUESTION 44
Choice C is the best answer because the full subject of the independent clause, “the advent of
the digital age,” directly follows the dependent clause that introduces it.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect because the subjects of their independent clauses do not
directly follow the introductory dependent clause. “Far from marking the end of investigative
journalism” refers to the “advent of the digital age,” not to “cooperation among journalists”
(choice A) or “the number of potential investigators” (choice B). In choice D, an interrupting
phrase (“by facilitating cooperation among journalists and ordinary citizens”) separates the
subject from the dependent clause that modifies it.



Section 3: Math Test - No Calculator
QUESTION 1
Choice D is correct. From the graph, the y-intercept of line      is (0, 1). The line also passes
                                                               2 1 1
through the point (1, 2). Therefore the slope of the line is         1 , and in slope-intercept
                                                               1 0 1
form, the equation for line    is y = x + 1.

Choice A is incorrect. It is the equation of the vertical line that passes through the point (1, 0).
Choice B is incorrect. It is the equation of the horizontal line that passes through the point (0,
1). Choice C is incorrect. The line defined by this equation has y-intercept (0, 0), whereas line
has y-intercept (0, 1).
QUESTION 2
Choice A is correct. A circle has 360 degrees of arc. In the circle shown, O is the center of the
circle and angle AOC is a central angle of the circle. From the figure, the two diameters that
meet to form angle AOC are perpendicular, so the measure of angle AOC is 90. This central
angle intercepts minor arc AC, meaning minor arc AC has 90 of arc. Since the circumference
                                                                      90
(length) of the entire circle is 36, the length of minor arc AC is        36  9 .
                                                                     360

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect. The perpendicular diameters divide the circumference of the
                                                          1
circle into four equal arcs; therefore, minor arc AC is     of the circumference. However, the
                                                          4
                                               1      1
lengths in choices B and C are, respectively,     and the circumference of the circle, and the
                                               3      2
                                                                                      1
length in choice D is the length of the entire circumference. None of these lengths is the
                                                                                      4
circumference.

QUESTION 3
Choice B is correct. Dividing both sides of the quadratic equation 4x2 − 8x − 12 = 0 by 4 yields x2
− 2x − 3 = 0. The equation x2 − 2x − 3 = 0 can be factored as (x + 1)(x − 3) = 0. This equation is
true when x + 1 = 0 or x − 3 = 0. Solving for x gives the solutions to the original quadratic
equation: x = −1 and x = 3.

Choices A and C are incorrect because −3 is not a solution of 4x2 − 8x − 12 = 0: 4(−3)2 − 8(−3) −
12 = 36 + 24 − 12 ≠ 0. Choice D is incorrect because 1 is not a solution of 4x2 − 8x − 12 = 0: 4(1)2
− 8(1) − 12 = 4 − 8 − 12 ≠ 0.

QUESTION 4
Choice C is correct. If f is a function of x, then the graph of f in the xy-plane consists of all points
(x, f(x)). An x-intercept is where the graph intersects the x-axis; since all points on the x-axis
have y-coordinate 0, the graph of f will cross the x-axis at values of x such that f(x) = 0.
Therefore, the graph of a function f will have no x-intercepts if and only if f has no real zeros.
Likewise, the graph of a quadratic function with no real zeros will have no x-intercepts.

Choice A is incorrect. The graph of a linear function in the xy-plane whose rate of change is not
zero is a line with a nonzero slope. The x-axis is a horizontal line and thus has slope 0, so the
graph of the linear function whose rate of change is not zero is a line that is not parallel to the
x-axis. Thus, the graph must intersect the x-axis at some point, and this point is an x-intercept
of the graph. Choices B and D are incorrect because the graph of any function with a real zero
must have an x-intercept.

QUESTION 5

Choice D is correct. If x = 9 in the equation k  2  x  0 , this equation becomes k  2  9  0 ,
which can be rewritten as k  2  9 . Squaring each side of k  2  9 gives k + 2 = 81, or k =
79. Substituting k = 79 into the equation k  2  9  0 confirms this is the correct value for k.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because substituting any of these values for k in the equation
 k  2  9  0 gives a false statement. For example, if k = 7, the equation becomes
 7  2  9  9  9  3  9  0, which is false.

QUESTION 6
Choice A is correct. The sum of (a2 − 1) and (a + 1) can be rewritten as (a2 − 1) + (a + 1), or a2 − 1
+ a + 1, which is equal to a2 + a + 0. Therefore, the sum of the two expressions is equal to a2 + a.

Choices B and D are incorrect. Since neither of the two expressions has a term with a3, the sum
of the two expressions cannot have the term a3 when simplified. Choice C is incorrect. This
choice may result from mistakenly adding the terms a2 and a to get 2a2.

QUESTION 7
Choice C is correct. If Jackie works x hours as a tutor, which pays $12 per hour, she earns 12x
dollars. If Jackie works y hours as a lifeguard, which pays $9.50 per hour, she earns 9.5y dollars.
Thus the total, in dollars, Jackie earns in a week that she works x hours as a tutor and y hours as
a lifeguard is 12x + 9.5y. Therefore, the condition that Jackie wants to earn at least $220 is
represented by the inequality 12x + 9.5y ≥ 220. The condition that Jackie can work no more
than 20 hours per week is represented by the inequality x + y ≤ 20. These two inequalities form
the system shown in choice C.

Choice A is incorrect. This system represents the conditions that Jackie earns no more than
$220 and works at least 20 hours. Choice B is incorrect. The first inequality in this system
represents the condition that Jackie earns no more than $220. Choice D is incorrect. The second
inequality in this system represents the condition that Jackie works at least 20 hours.

QUESTION 8
Choice A is correct. The constant term 331.4 in S(T) = 0.6T + 331.4 is the value of S when T = 0.
The value T = 0 corresponds to a temperature of 0°C. Since S(T) represents the speed of sound,
331.4 is the speed of sound, in meters per second, when the temperature is 0°C.

Choice B is incorrect. When T = 0.6°C, S(T) = 0.6(0.6) + 331.4 = 331.76, not 331.4, meters per
second. Choice C is incorrect. Based on the given formula, the speed of sound increases by 0.6
meters per second for every increase of temperature by 1°C, as shown by the equation 0.6(T +
1) + 331.4 = (0.6T + 331.4) +0.6. Choice D is incorrect. An increase in the speed of sound, in
meters per second, that corresponds to an increase of 0.6°C is 0.6(0.6) = 0.36.

QUESTION 9
Choice A is correct. Substituting x2 for y in the second equation gives 2(x2) + 6 = 2(x + 3). This
equation can be solved as follows:

2x2 + 6 = 2x + 6 (Apply the distributive property.)

2x2 + 6 − 2x − 6 = 0 (Subtract 2x and 6 from both sides of the equation.)

2x2 − 2x = 0 (Combine like terms.)

2x(x − 1) = 0 (Factor both terms on the left side of the equation by 2x.)

Thus, x = 0 and x = 1 are the solutions to the system. Since x > 0, only x = 1 needs to be
considered. The value of y when x = 1 is y = x2 = 12 = 1. Therefore, the value of xy is (1)(1) = 1.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and likely result from a computational or conceptual error
when solving this system of equations.

QUESTION 10
Choice B is correct. Substituting a2 + b2 for z and ab for y into the expression 4z + 8y gives 4(a2 +
b2) + 8ab. Multiplying a2 + b2 by 4 gives 4a2 + 4b2 + 8ab, or equivalently 4(a2 + 2ab + b2). Since
(a2 + 2ab + b2) = (a + b)2 , it follows that 4z + 8y is equivalent to (2a + 2b)2.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and likely result from errors made when substituting or
factoring.

QUESTION 11
Choice C is correct. The volume of right circular cylinder A is given by the expression πr2h,
where r is the radius of its circular base and h is its height. The volume of a cylinder with twice
                                                                   1                                           1
the radius and half the height of cylinder A is given by π(2r)2( )h, which is equivalent to 4πr2(
                                                                   2                                           2
)h = 2πr2h. Therefore, the volume is twice the volume of cylinder A, or 2 × 22 = 44.

Choice A is incorrect and likely results from not multiplying the radius of cylinder A by 2. Choice
B is incorrect and likely results from not squaring the 2 in 2r when applying the volume formula.
Choice D is incorrect and likely results from a conceptual error.

QUESTION 12
                                                          3                         3
                                                                                   ( )
                                                      2                        2    4
Choice D is correct. Since 9 can be rewritten as 3 , 9 is equivalent to 3
                                                          4
                                                                                         . Applying the
                                                      3                                                2   1
properties of exponents, this can be written as 3 , which can further be rewritten as 3 2 ( 3 2 ), an
                                                      2


expression that is equivalent to 3 3 .
                                              1                                                    1
Choices A is incorrect; it is equivalent to 9 3 . Choice B is incorrect; it is equivalent to 9 4 . Choice
                                      1
C is incorrect; it is equivalent to 3 2 .

QUESTION 13
Choice B is correct. When n is increased by 1, t increases by the coefficient of n, which is 1.

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and likely result from a conceptual error when interpreting the
equation.

QUESTION 14
Choice C is correct. The graph of y = −f(x) is the graph of the equation y = −(2x + 1), or y = −2x − 1.
This should be the graph of a decreasing exponential function. The y-intercept of the graph can
be found by substituting the value x = 0 into the equation, as follows: y = −20 − 1 = −1 − 1 = −2.
Therefore, the graph should pass through the point (0, −2). Choice C is the only function that
passes through this point.

Choices A and B are incorrect because the graphed functions are increasing instead of
decreasing. Choice D is incorrect because the function passes through the point (0, −1) instead
of (0, −2).

QUESTION 15
Choice D is correct. Since gasoline costs $4 per gallon, and since Alan’s car travels an average of
                                        4
25 miles per gallon, the expression        gives the cost, in dollars per mile, to drive the car.
                                        25
           4
Multiplying   by m gives the cost for Alan to drive m miles in his car. Alan wants to reduce his
           25
                                 4
weekly spending by $5, so setting m equal to 5 gives the number of miles, m, by which he
                                 25
must reduce his driving.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect. Choices A and B transpose the numerator and the
                                               25
denominator in the fraction. The fraction         would result in the unit miles per dollar, but the
                                               4
question requires a unit of dollars per mile. Choices A and C set the expression equal to 95
instead of 5, a mistake that may result from a misconception that Alan wants to reduce his
driving by 5 miles each week; instead, the question says he wants to reduce his weekly
expenditure by $5.

QUESTION 16
The correct answer is 4. The equation 60h + 10 ≤ 280, where h is the number of hours the boat
has been rented, can be written to represent the situation. Subtracting 10 from both sides and
then dividing by 60 yields h ≤ 4.5. Since the boat can be rented only for whole numbers of
hours, the maximum number of hours for which Maria can rent the boat is 4.

QUESTION 17
                          6
The correct answer is       , or 1.2. To solve the equation 2(p + 1) + 8(p − 1) = 5p, first distribute the
                          5
terms outside the parentheses to the terms inside the parentheses: 2p + 2 + 8p − 8 = 5p. Next,
combine like terms on the left side of the equal sign: 10p − 6 = 5p. Subtracting 10p from both
                                                                       6
sides yields −6 = −5p. Finally, dividing both sides by −5 gives p =      = 1.2. Either 6/5 or 1.2 can be
                                                                       5
gridded as the correct answer.

QUESTION 18
                          21
The correct answer is        , or 5.25. Use substitution to create a one-variable equation that can
                          4
be solved for x. The second equation gives that y = 2x. Substituting 2x for y in the first equation
      1              21                                          1
gives (2x  2x )       . Dividing both sides of this equation by yields (2x  2x )  21 . Combining
      2              2                                           2
                                                                                 21
like terms results in 4x = 21. Finally, dividing both sides by 4 gives x =          = 5.25. Either 21/4 or
                                                                                 4
5.25 can be gridded as the correct answer.

QUESTION 19
                                                                               2x  6 2 x  4
The correct answer is 2. The given expression can be rewritten as                                , which is
                                                                              ( x  2)2 ( x  2)2
                2x  6  2x  4          2                                a
equivalent to                   , or            . This is in the form           ; therefore, a = 2.
                   ( x  2)2
                                     ( x  2) 2
                                                                      ( x  2)2

QUESTION 20
The correct answer is 97. The intersecting lines form a triangle, and the angle with measure of
x° is an exterior angle of this triangle. The measure of an exterior angle of a triangle is equal to
the sum of the measures of the two nonadjacent interior angles of the triangle. One of these
angles has measure of 23° and the other, which is supplementary to the angle with measure
106, has measure of 180° − 106° = 74. Therefore, the value of x is 23 + 74 = 97.



Section 4: Math Test - Calculator
QUESTION 1
Choice D is correct. The change in the number of 3-D movies released between any two
consecutive years can be found by first estimating the number of 3-D movies released for each
of the two years and then finding the positive difference between these two estimates.
Between 2003 and 2004, this change is approximately 2 − 2 = 0 movies; between 2008 and
2009, this change is approximately 20 − 8 = 12 movies; between 2009 and 2010, this change is
approximately 26 − 20 = 6 movies; and between 2010 and 2011, this change is approximately
46 − 26 = 20 movies. Therefore, of the pairs of consecutive years in the choices, the greatest
increase in the number of 3-D movies released occurred during the time period between 2010
and 2011.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect. Between 2010 and 2011, approximately 20 more 3-D movies
were released. The change in the number of 3-D movies released between any of the other
pairs of consecutive years is significantly smaller than 20.

QUESTION 2
Choice C is correct. Because f is a linear function of x, the equation f(x) = mx + b, where m and b
are constants, can be used to define the relationship between x and f(x). In this equation, m
represents the increase in the value of f(x) for every increase in the value of x by 1. From the
table, it can be determined that the value of f(x) increases by 8 for every increase in the value
                                                               8
of x by 2. In other words, for the function f the value of m is , or 4. The value of b can be found
                                                               2
by substituting the values of x and f(x) from any row of the table and the value of m into the
equation f(x) = mx + b and solving for b. For example, using x = 1, f(x) = 5, and m = 4 yields 5 =
4(1) + b. Solving for b yields b = 1. Therefore, the equation defining the function f can be written
in the form f(x) = 4x + 1.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect. Any equation defining the linear function f must give values of
f(x) for corresponding values of x, as shown in each row of the table. According to the table, if x
= 3, f(x) = 13. However, substituting x = 3 into the equation given in choice A gives f(3) = 2(3) +
3, or f(3) = 9, not 13. Similarly, substituting x = 3 into the equation given in choice B gives f(3) =
3(3) + 2, or f(3) = 11, not 13. Lastly, substituting x = 3 into the equation given in choice D gives
f(3) = 5(3), or f(3) = 15, not 13. Therefore, the equations in choices A, B, and D cannot define f.

QUESTION 3
Choice A is correct. If 2.5 ounces of chocolate are needed for each muffin, then the number of
ounces of chocolate needed to make 48 muffins is 48 × 2.5 = 120 ounces. Since 1 pound = 16
                                                                      120
ounces, the number of pounds that is equivalent to 120 ounces is          = 7.5 pounds. Therefore,
                                                                       16
7.5 pounds of chocolate are needed to make the 48 muffins.

Choice B is incorrect. If 10 pounds of chocolate were needed to make 48 muffins, then the total
number of ounces of chocolate needed would be 10 × 16 = 160 ounces. The number of ounces
                                         160
of chocolate per muffin would then be        = 3.33 ounces per muffin, not 2.5 ounces per
                                          48
muffin. Choices C and D are also incorrect. Following the same procedures as used to test choice
B gives 16.8 ounces per muffin for choice C and 40 ounces per muffin for choice D, not 2.5
ounces per muffin. Therefore, 50.5 and 120 pounds cannot be the number of pounds needed to
make 48 signature chocolate muffins.

QUESTION 4
Choice B is correct. The value of c + d can be found by dividing both sides of the given equation
                            5
by 3. This yields c + d =     .
                            3
                                                  3           3             9
Choice A is incorrect. If the value of c + d is     , then 3 × = 5; however, is not equal to 5.
                                                  5           5             5
Choice C is incorrect. If the value of c + d is 3, then 3 × 3 = 5; however, 9 is not equal to 5.
Choice D is incorrect. If the value of c + d is 5, then 3 × 5 = 5; however, 15 is not equal to 5.

QUESTION 5
                                                                             9
Choice C is correct. The weight of an object on Venus is approximately         of its weight on
                                                                            10
Earth. If an object weighs 100 pounds on Earth, then the object’s weight on Venus is given by
 9                                                                          23
   100  = 90 pounds. The same object’s weight on Jupiter is approximately    of its weight on
10                                                                          10
                                   23
Earth; therefore, the object weighs 100  = 230 pounds on Jupiter. The difference between
                                   10
the object’s weight on Jupiter and the object’s weight on Venus is 230 − 90 = 140 pounds.
Therefore, an object that weighs 100 pounds on Earth weighs 140 more pounds on Jupiter than
it weighs on Venus.

Choice A is incorrect because it is the weight, in pounds, of the object on Venus. Choice B is
incorrect because it is the weight, in pounds, of an object on Earth if it weighs 100 pounds on
Venus. Choice D is incorrect because it is the weight, in pounds, of the object on Jupiter.

QUESTION 6
Choice B is correct. Let n be the number of novels and m be the number of magazines that
Sadie purchased. If Sadie purchased a total of 11 novels and magazines, then n + m = 11. It is
given that the combined price of 11 novels and magazines is $20. Since each novel sells for $4
and each magazine sells for $1, it follows that 4n + m = 20. So the system of equations below
must hold.

                                            4n + m = 20
                                             n + m = 11
Subtracting side by side the second equation from the first equation yields 3n = 9, so n = 3.
Therefore, Sadie purchased 3 novels.

Choice A is incorrect. If 2 novels were purchased, then a total of $8 was spent on novels. That
leaves $12 to be spent on magazines, which means that 12 magazines would have been
purchased. However, Sadie purchased a total of 11 novels and magazines. Choices C and D are
incorrect. If 4 novels were purchased, then a total of $16 was spent on novels. That leaves $4 to
be spent on magazines, which means that 4 magazines would have been purchased. By the
same logic, if Sadie purchased 5 novels, she would have no money at all ($0) to buy magazines.
However, Sadie purchased a total of 11 novels and magazines.

QUESTION 7
Choice A is correct. The DBA plans to increase its membership by n businesses each year, so x
years from now, the association plans to have increased its membership by nx businesses. Since
there are already b businesses at the beginning of this year, the total number of businesses, y,
the DBA plans to have as members x years from now is modeled by y = nx + b.

Choice B is incorrect. The equation given in choice B correctly represents the increase in
membership x years from now as nx. However, the number of businesses at the beginning of
the year, b, has been subtracted from this amount of increase, not added to it. Choices C and D
are incorrect because they use exponential models to represent the increase in membership.
Since the membership increases by n businesses each year, this situation is correctly modeled
by a linear relationship.

QUESTION 8
Choice C is correct. The first expression (1.5x − 2.4)2 can be rewritten as (1.5x − 2.4)(1.5x − 2.4).
Applying the distributive property to this product yields (2.25x2 − 3.6x − 3.6x + 5.76) − (5.2x2 −
6.4). This difference can be rewritten as (2.25x2 − 3.6x − 3.6x + 5.76) + (−1)(5.2x2 − 6.4).
Distributing the factor of −1 through the second expression yields 2.25x2 − 3.6x − 3.6x + 5.76 −
5.2x2 + 6.4. Regrouping like terms, the expression becomes (2.25x2 − 5.2x2) + (−3.6x − 3.6x) +
(5.76 + 6.4). Combining like terms yields −2.95x2 − 7.2x + 12.16.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect and likely result from errors made when applying the
distributive property or combining the resulting like terms.

QUESTION 9
Choice B is correct. In 1908, the marathon was lengthened by 42 − 40 = 2 kilometers. Since 1
mile is approximately 1.6 kilometers, the increase of 2 kilometers can be converted to miles by
                                           1mile
multiplying as shown: 2 kilometers                   1.25miles .
                                       1.6kilometers

Choices A, C, and D are incorrect and may result from errors made when applying the
conversion rate or other computational errors.

QUESTION 10
Choice A is correct. The density d of an object can be found by dividing the mass m of the
                                                                              m
object by its volume V. Symbolically this is expressed by the equation d       . Solving this
                                                                              V
equation for m yields m = dV.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and are likely the result of errors made when translating the
definition of density into an algebraic equation and errors made when solving this equation for
m. If the equations given in choices B, C, and D are each solved for density d, none of the
                                             m
resulting equations are equivalent to d       .
                                             V
QUESTION 11
Choice A is correct. The equation −2x + 3y = 6 can be rewritten in the slope-intercept form as
               2                                                          2
follows: y =     x + 2. So the slope of the graph of the given equation is . In the xy-plane, when
               3                                                          3
two nonvertical lines are perpendicular, the product of their slopes is −1. So, if m is the slope of
                                                 2                 2
a line perpendicular to the line with equation y = x + 2, then m × = −1, which yields m =
                                                 3                 3
 3                                                                                        3
 . Of the given choices, only the equation in choice A can be rewritten in the form y =  x +
 2                                                                                        2
b, for some constant b. Therefore, the graph of the equation in choice A is perpendicular to the
graph of the given equation.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because the graphs of the equations in these choices have
                           3    1        1         3
slopes, respectively, of  ,  , and  , not  .
                           4    2        3         2

QUESTION 12
Choice D is correct. Adding the two equations side by side eliminates y and yields x = 6, as
shown.

                                                1
                                                  y4
                                                2
                                                1
                                              x y 2
                                                2
                                              x0  6

If (x, y) is a solution to the system, then (x, y) satisfies both equations in the system and any
equation derived from them. Therefore, x = 6.
Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may be the result of errors when solving the system.

QUESTION 13
Choice D is correct. Any point (x, y) that is a solution to the given system of inequalities must
satisfy both inequalities in the system. Since the second inequality in the system can be
rewritten as y < x − 1, the system is equivalent to the following system.

                                         y  3x  1
                                         y  x 1

Since 3x + 1 > x − 1 for x > −1 and 3x + 1 ≤ x − 1 for x ≤ −1, it follows that y < x − 1 for x > −1 and y
≤ 3x + 1 for x ≤ −1. Of the given choices, only (2, −1) satisfies these conditions because −1 < 2 − 1
= 1.

Alternate approach: Substituting (2, −1) into the first inequality gives −1 ≤ 3(2) + 1, or −1 ≤ 7,
which is a true statement. Substituting (2, −1) into the second inequality gives 2 − (−1) > 1, or 3
> 1, which is a true statement. Therefore, since (2, −1) satisfies both inequalities, it is a solution
to the system.

Choice A is incorrect because substituting −2 for x and −1 for y in the first inequality gives −1 ≤
3(−2) + 1, or −1 ≤ −5, which is false. Choice B is incorrect because substituting −1 for x and 3 for
y in the first inequality gives 3 ≤ 3(−1) + 1, or 3 ≤ −2, which is false. Choice C is incorrect
because substituting 1 for x and 5 for y in the first inequality gives 5 ≤ 3(1) + 1, or 5 ≤ 4, which is
false.

QUESTION 14
Choice A is correct. According to the table, 74 orthopedic surgeons indicated that research is
their major professional activity. Since a total of 607 surgeons completed the survey, it follows
that the probability that the randomly selected surgeon is an orthopedic surgeon whose
indicated major professional activity is research is 74 out of 607, or 74/607, which is  0.122.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect and may be the result of finding the probability that the
randomly selected surgeon is an orthopedic surgeon whose major professional activity is
teaching (choice B), an orthopedic surgeon whose major professional activity is either teaching
or research (choice C), or a general surgeon or orthopedic surgeon whose major professional
activity is research (choice D).

QUESTION 15
Choice A is correct. Statement I need not be true. The fact that 78% of the 1,000 adults who
were surveyed responded that they were satisfied with the air quality in the city does not mean
that the exact same percentage of all adults in the city will be satisfied with the air quality in the
city. Statement II need not be true because random samples, even when they are of the same
size, are not necessarily identical with regard to percentages of people in them who have a
certain opinion. Statement III need not be true for the same reason that statement II need not
be true: results from different samples can vary. The variation may be even bigger for this
sample since it would be selected from a different city. Therefore, none of the statements must
be true.

Choices B, C, and D are incorrect because none of the statements must be true.

QUESTION 16
Choice D is correct. According to the given information, multiplying a tree species’ growth
factor by the tree’s diameter is a method to approximate the age of the tree. Multiplying the
growth factor, 4.0, of the American elm given in the table by the given diameter of 12 inches
yields an approximate age of 48 years.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because they do not result from multiplying the given
diameter of an American elm tree with that tree species’ growth factor..

QUESTION 17
Choice D is correct. The growth factor of a tree species is approximated by the slope of a line of
best fit that models the relationship between diameter and age. A line of best fit can be visually
estimated by identifying a line that goes in the same direction of the data and where roughly
half the given data points fall above and half the given data points fall below the line. Two
points that fall on the line can be used to estimate the slope and y-intercept of the equation of
a line of best fit. Estimating a line of best fit for the given scatterplot could give the points (11,
80) and (15, 110). Using these two points, the slope of the equation of the line of best fit can be
                110  80
calculated as            , or 7.5. The slope of the equation is interpreted as the growth factor for a
                 15  11
species of tree. According to the table, the species of tree with a growth factor of 7.5 is
shagbark hickory.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and likely result from errors made when estimating a line of
best fit for the given scatterplot and its slope.

QUESTION 18
Choice C is correct. According to the given information, multiplying a tree species’ growth
factor by the tree’s diameter is a method to approximate the age of the tree. A white birch with
a diameter of 12 inches (or 1 foot) has a given growth factor of 5 and is approximately 60 years
old. A pin oak with a diameter of 12 inches (or 1 foot) has a given growth factor of 3 and is
approximately 36 years old. The diameters of the two trees 10 years from now can be found by
dividing each tree’s age in 10 years, 70 years, and 46 years, by its respective growth factor. This
                        1                                     1            1
yields 14 inches and 15 inches. The difference between 15       and 14 is 1 , or approximately
                        3                                     3            3
1.3 inches.

Choices A, B, and D are incorrect and a result of incorrectly calculating the diameters of the two
trees in 10 years.

QUESTION 19
Choice B is correct. Triangles ADB and CDB are congruent to each other because they are both
30°-60°-90° triangles and share the side BD . In triangle ADB, side AD is opposite to the angle
30°; therefore, the length of AD is half the length of hypotenuse AB . Since the triangles are
                                                  12
congruent, AB = BC = 12. So the length of AD is       6.
                                                   2

Choice A is incorrect. If the length of AD were 4, then the length of AB would be 8. However,
this is incorrect because AB is congruent to BC , which has a length of 12. Choices C and D are
also incorrect. Following the same procedures as used to test choice A gives AB a length of
12 2 for choice C and 12 3 for choice D. However, these results cannot be true because AB is
congruent to BC , which has a length of 12.

QUESTION 20
Choice D is correct. The graph on the right shows the change in distance from the ground of the
mark on the rim over time. The y-intercept of the graph corresponds to the mark’s position at
the start of the motion (t = 0); at this moment, the mark is at its highest point from the ground.
As the wheel rolls, the mark approaches the ground, its distance from the ground decreasing
until it reaches 0—the point where it touches the ground. After that, the mark moves up and
away from the ground, its distance from the ground increasing until it reaches its maximum
height from the ground. This is the moment when the wheel has completed a full rotation. The
remaining part of the graph shows the distance of the mark from the ground during the second
rotation of the wheel. Therefore, of the given choices, only choice D is in agreement with the
given information.
Choice A is incorrect because the speed at which the wheel is rolling does not change over time,
meaning the graph representing the speed would be a horizontal line. Choice B is incorrect
because the distance of the wheel from its starting point to its ending point increases
continuously; the graph shows a quantity that changes periodically over time, alternately
decreasing and increasing. Choice C is incorrect because the distance of the mark from the
center of the wheel is constant and equals the radius of the wheel. The graph representing this
distance would be a horizontal line, not the curved line of the graph shown.

QUESTION 21
                                                               b                              b
Choice A is correct. The equation can be rewritten as 1          c , or equivalently 1  c  . Since a
                                                               a                              a
                                 b
< 0 and b > 0, it follows that      0 , and so 1 − c < 0, or equivalently c > 1.
                                 a

Choice B is incorrect. If c = 1, then a − b = a, or b = 0. But it is given that b > 0, so c = 1 cannot be
true. Choice C is incorrect. If c = −1, then a − b = −a, or 2a = b. But this equation contradicts the
premise that a < 0 and b > 0, so c = −1 cannot be true. Choice D is incorrect. For example, if c =
−2, then a − b = −2a, or 3a = b. But this contradicts the fact that a and b have opposite signs, so
c < −1 cannot be true.

QUESTION 22
Choice C is correct. It is given that 34.6% of 26 students in Mr. Camp’s class reported that they
had at least two siblings. Since 34.6% of 26 is 8.996, there must have been 9 students in the
class who reported having at least two siblings and 17 students who reported that they had
fewer than two siblings. It is also given that the average eighth-grade class size in the state is 26
and that Mr. Camp’s class is representative of all eighth-grade classes in the state. This means
that in each eighth-grade class in the state there are about 17 students who have fewer than
two siblings. Therefore, the best estimate of the number of eighth-grade students in the state
who have fewer than two siblings is 17 × (number of eighth-grade classes in the state), or 17 ×
1,800 = 30,600.

Choice A is incorrect because 16,200 is the best estimate for the number of eighth-grade
students in the state who have at least, not fewer than, two siblings. Choice B is incorrect
because 23,400 is half of the estimated total number of eighth-grade students in the state;
however, since the students in Mr. Camp’s class are representative of students in the eighth-
grade classes in the state and more than half of the students in Mr. Camp’s class have fewer
than two siblings, more than half of the students in each eighth-grade class in the state have
fewer than two siblings, too. Choice D is incorrect because 46,800 is the estimated total
number of eighth-grade students in the state.
QUESTION 23
Choice D is correct. The linear function that represents the relationship will be in the form r(p)
= ap + b, where a and b are constants and r(p) is the monthly rental price, in dollars, of a
property that was purchased with p thousands of dollars. According to the table, (70, 515) and
(450, 3,365) are ordered pairs that should satisfy the function, which leads to the system of
equations below.

                                             70a  b  515
                                            
                                            450a  b  3,365

Subtracting side by side the first equation from the second eliminates b and gives 380a = 2,850;
                          2,850
solving for a gives a           7.5 . Substituting 7.5 for a in the first equation of the system gives
                           380
525 + b = 515; solving for b gives b = −10. Therefore, the linear function that represents the
relationship is r(p) = 7.5p − 10.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect because the coefficient of p, or the rate at which the rental
price, in dollars, increases for every thousand-dollar increase of the purchase price is different
from what is suggested by these choices. For example, the Glenview Street property was
purchased for $140,000, but the rental price that each of the functions in these choices
provides is significantly off from the rental price given in the table, $1,040.

QUESTION 24
Choice B is correct. Let x be the original price, in dollars, of the Glenview Street property. After
the 40% discount, the price of the property became 0.6x dollars, and after the additional 20%
off the discounted price, the price of the property became 0.8(0.6x). Thus, in terms of the
original price of the property, x, the purchase price of the property is 0.48x. It follows that 0.48x
= 140,000. Solving this equation for x gives x  291,666.6 . Therefore, of the given choices,
$291,700 best approximates the original price of the Glenview Street property.

Choice A is incorrect because it is the result of dividing the purchase price of the property by
0.4, as though the purchase price were 40% of the original price. Choice C is incorrect because it
is the closest to dividing the purchase price of the property by 0.6, as though the purchase price
were 60% of the original price. Choice D is incorrect because it is the result of dividing the
purchase price of the property by 0.8, as though the purchase price were 80% of the original
price.

QUESTION 25
Choice D is correct. Of the first 150 participants, 36 chose the first picture in the set, and of the
150 remaining participants, p chose the first picture in the set. Hence, the proportion of the
                                                        36  p
participants who chose the first picture in the set is         . Since more than 20% of all the
                                                         300
                                                      36  p
participants chose the first picture, it follows that         0.20 . This inequality can be
                                                       300
rewritten as p + 36 > 0.20(300). Since p is a number of people among the remaining 150
participants, p ≤ 150.

Choices A, B, and C are incorrect and may be the result of some incorrect interpretations of the
given information or of computational errors.

QUESTION 26
Choice B is correct. A cube has 6 faces of equal area, so if the total surface area of a cube is
      2                                       2
  a                                a
6   , then the area of one face is   . Likewise, the area of one face of a cube is the square
  4                                4
                                                                   2
                                                             a
of one of its sides; therefore, if the area of one face is   , then the length of one side of the
                                                           4
              a
cube is         . Since the perimeter of one face of a cube is four times the length of one side, the
              4

perimeter is 4    a .
                 a
                 4   

                                                                                a
Choice A is incorrect because if the perimeter of one face of the cube is         , then the total
                                                                                4
                                          2
                              a
                               
                                               2                       2
                                        a                       a
surface area of the cube is 6  4   6   , which is not      6   . Choice C is incorrect because if
                              4        16                     4
                               
the perimeter of one face of the cube is 4a, then the total surface area of the cube is
          2                           2
   4a                       a
6    6a 2 , which is not 6   . Choice D is incorrect because if the perimeter of one face of
   4                        4
                                                                       2        2                       2
                                                              6a    3a                       a
the cube is 6a, then the total surface area of the cube is 6    6   , which is not         6  .
                                                              4     2                        4

QUESTION 27
Choice C is correct. If the mean score of 8 players is 14.5, then the total of all 8 scores is 14.5 ×
8 = 116. If the mean of 7 scores is 12, then the total of all 7 scores is 12 × 7 = 84. Since the set of
7 scores was made by removing the highest score of the set of 8 scores, then the difference
between the total of all 8 scores and the total of all 7 scores is equal to the removed score: 116
− 84 = 32.

Choice A is incorrect because if 20 is removed from the group of 8 scores, then the mean score
                                   14.5  8  20  13.71
of the remaining 7 players is                                , not 12. Choice B is incorrect because if 24 is
                                         7
removed from the group of 8 scores, then the mean score of the remaining 7 players is
14.5  8  24  13.14
                          , not 12. Choice D is incorrect because if 36 is removed from the group of 8
      7
                                                                      14.5  8  36  11.43
scores, then the mean score of the remaining 7 players is                                       , not 12.
                                                                            7

QUESTION 28
                                                 rise
Choice C is correct. The slope of a line is           and can be calculated using the coordinates of
                                                 run
any two points on the line. For example, the graph of f passes through the points (0, 3) and (2,
                                         43 1
4), so the slope of the graph of f is        . The slope of the graph of function g is 4 times the
                                         20 2

slope of the graph of f, so the slope of the graph of g is 4    2 . Since the point (0, −4) is the
                                                               1
                                                               2      
y-intercept of g, g is defined as g(x) = 2x − 4. It follows that g(9) = 2(9) − 4 = 14.

                                                                                                       4  5
Choice A is incorrect because if g(9) = 5, then the slope of the graph of function g is                       1,
                                                                                                       09
which is not 4 times the slope of the graph of f. Choices B and D are also incorrect. The same
                                               4  9 13     4  18 22
procedures used to test choice A yields                 and           for the slope of the graph
                                               09     9      09     9
of g for choices B and D, respectively. Neither of these slopes is 4 times the slope of the graph
of f.

QUESTION 29
Choice B is correct. The standard equation of a circle in the xy-plane is of the form (x − h)2 + (y −
k)2 = r2, where (h, k) are the coordinates of the center of the circle and r is the radius. To
convert the given equation to the standard form, complete the squares. The first two terms
need a 100 to complete the square, and the second two terms need a 64. Adding 100 and 64 to
both sides of the given equation yields (x2 + 20x + 100) + (y2 + 16y + 64) = −20 + 100 + 64, which
is equivalent to (x + 10)2 + (y + 8)2 = 144. Therefore, the coordinates of the center of the circle
are (−10, −8).

Choice A is incorrect and is likely the result of not properly dividing when attempting to
complete the square. Choice C is incorrect and is likely the result of making a sign error when
evaluating the coordinates of the center. Choice D is incorrect and is likely the result of not
properly dividing when attempting to complete the square and making a sign error when
evaluating the coordinates of the center.

QUESTION 30
Choice B is correct. The given equation can be thought of as the difference of two squares,
                                                         a  . Using the difference of squares formula,
                                                            2
where one square is x 2 and the other square is

the equation can be rewritten as y   x        a  x  a  .


Choices A, C, and D are incorrect because they are not equivalent to the given equation. Choice
A is incorrect because it is equivalent to y = x2 − a2. Choice C is incorrect because it is equivalent
               a2
to y  x 2       . Choice D is incorrect because it is equivalent to y = x2 + 2ax + a2.
               4

QUESTION 31
The correct answer is 1492. Let x be the number of watts that is equal to 2 horsepower. Since 5
                                                          2   x
horsepower is equal to 3730 watts, it follows that              . Solving this proportion for x yields
                                                          5 3730
                      7460
5x = 7460, or x =          = 1492.
                        